
BLUE BEARD


In the East, in a city not far from Baghdad, there lived a man who had
many possessions and might have been envied by all who knew him had
these possessions been less by one. He had fine houses in town and
country, retinues of servants, gold and silver plate in abundance,
coffers heaped with jewels, costly carpets, embroidered furniture,
cabinets full of curiosities, gilded coaches, teams of Arab horses of
the purest breed. But unluckily he had also a blue beard, which made
him so frightfully ugly that every woman wanted to scream and run away
at sight of him.

Among his neighbours was a lady of quality, who had two sons and two
daughters. Upon these two damsels _Blue Beard_ cast his affections,
without knowing precisely which he preferred; and asked the lady to
bestow the hand of one of her daughters upon him, adding, not too
tactfully, that he would leave the choice to her. Neither _Anne_ nor
_Fatima_ was eager for the honour. They sent their suitor to and fro,
and back again from one to the other: they really could not make up
their minds to accept a husband with a blue beard. It increased their
repugnance (for they were somewhat romantic young ladies) to learn that
he had already married several wives; and, moreover, nobody could tell
what had become of them, which again was not reassuring.

_Blue Beard_, to make their better acquaintance, invited them, with
their mother and brothers and a dozen or so of their youthful friends,
to divert themselves at one of his country houses, where they spent
a whole fortnight, and (as they confessed) in the most agreeable
pastimes. Each day brought some fresh entertainment: they hunted,
they hawked, they practised archery, they angled for gold-fish,
or were rowed to the sound of music on the waters of their host's
private canal, they picnicked in the ruined castles, of which he owned
quite a number. Each day concluded, too, with banqueting, dancing,
card-parties, theatricals; or would have concluded, had these young
people felt any disposition to go to bed. They preferred, however, to
sit up until morning, joking and teasing one another. _Blue Beard_,
who had arrived at middle age, would have been grateful for a little
more sleep than they allowed him, but showed himself highly complaisant
and smiled at their pranks even when--their awe of him having worn
off--they balanced a basin of water above his chamber door, to fall
on his head and douch him, or sewed up his night-garments, or stuffed
his bolster with the prickly cactus (an Eastern vegetable, of which
he possessed whole avenues); nay, even when, for the same mischievous
purpose, they despoiled his garden of an aloe which was due to blossom
in a few days' time, after having remained flowerless for a century, he
betrayed no chagrin but merely raised the wages of his head-gardener,
heart-broken over the loss of a plant so economical in giving pleasure.
In short all went so smoothly that the younger daughter began to find
their host's beard not so blue after all.

She confided this to her mother. 'Dear mother,' she said, 'it is
doubtless nothing more than my fancy, but his beard _does_ seem to me
to have altered in colour during the last ten days--a very little, of
course.'

'Then you, too, have observed it!' the lady interrupted delightedly.
'My dearest child, you cannot imagine how your words relieve me! For
a week past I have accused my eyesight of failing me, and myself of
growing old.'

'Then you really think there _is_ a change?' asked _Fatima_, at once
doubtful and hoping.

'Indeed, yes. Ask yourself if it be reasonable to suppose that our eyes
are playing a trick on both of us? Not,' her mother went on, 'that
I, for my part, have any prejudice against blue. On the contrary,
it is a beautiful colour, and considered lucky. The poets--you will
have remarked--when they would figure to us the highest attainable
happiness, select a blue flower or a blue bird for its emblem. Heaven
itself is blue; and, at the least, a blue beard must be allowed to
confer distinction.'

'A greyish-blue,' hazarded _Fatima_.

'A bluish-grey, rather,' her mother corrected her: 'that is, if I must
define the shade as it appears to me.'

'And,' still hesitated _Fatima_, 'since it has begun to change, there
seems no reason why it should not continue to do so.'

'My darling'--her mother kissed her--'that is precisely the point! Its
colour is changing, you say. But for what reason? Obviously because he
is in love; and what love has begun, love can carry to a conclusion.
Nay, but put it on the ground of pity alone. Could a feeling heart set
itself any task more angelic than to rescue so worthy a gentleman from
so hideous an affliction--if affliction it be, which I am far from
allowing?'

_Fatima_ reflected on her mother's advice, but thought it prudent to
consult her sister _Anne_ and her step-brothers before coming to a
decision which, once taken, must be irrevocable.

They listened to her very good-naturedly; though, to tell the truth,
all three were somewhat jaded, having sat up all night at the
card-tables, playing at ombre, quadrille, lasquenet; and Heaven knows
what other games.

'My dear _Fatima_,' said her sister _Anne_ with a little yawn, 'I
congratulate you with all my heart on having made a discovery which,
beyond a doubt and but for your better diligence, I should have had to
make for myself before long.'

As for her step-brothers, they were in the best of humours at having
won a considerable sum of money from their host by superior play; and
they answered her, quoting a proverb, that 'at nights all cats are
grey, and all beards too,' and seemed to consider this very much to the
point.

_Fatima_ was greatly relieved by these assurances. On the evening
before the company dispersed _Blue Beard_ again sought a private
interview and pressed his suit. She accepted him without further ado,
and as soon as they returned to town the marriage was concluded.


They had been married little more than a month when _Blue Beard_ came
to his wife one morning, and told her that letters of importance had
arrived for him: he must take a journey into the country and be away
six weeks at least on a matter of business. He desired her to divert
herself in his absence by sending for her friends, to carry them off to
the country if she pleased, and to make good cheer wherever she was.

'Here,' said he, 'are the keys of the two great store-chambers where
I keep my spare furniture; these open the strong-rooms of my gold and
silver plate which is only used on state occasions; these unlock my
chests of money, both gold and silver; these, my jewel coffers; and
this is the master-key to all my apartments. But this little one, here,
is the key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the ground
floor. Open all the others; go where you will. But into that little
closet I forbid you to go; and I forbid it so strongly that if you
_should_ disobey me and open it, there is nothing you may not expect
from my displeasure.'

_Fatima_ promised to obey all his orders exactly; whereupon he embraced
her, got into his coach, and was driven off.

Her good friends and neighbours scarcely waited for the young bride's
invitation, so impatient were they to view all the riches of her
grand house, having never dared to come while her husband was at
home, because of his terrifying blue beard. They overran the house
without loss of time, hunting their curiosity from room to room, along
the corridors and in and out of closets and wardrobes, cabinets and
presses; opening cupboards, ferreting in drawers, and still exclaiming
over their contents as each new discovery proved more wonderful than
the last. They roamed through the bedrooms and spent a long while in
the two great store-chambers, where they could not sufficiently admire
the number and beauty of the tapestries, beds, sofas, consoles, stands,
tables, but particularly the looking-glasses, in which you could see
yourself from head to foot, with their frames of glass and silver and
silver-gilt, the finest and costliest ever seen. They ceased not to
extol and to envy their friend's good fortune.

'If my husband could only give me such a house as this,' said one to
another, 'for aught I cared he might have a beard of all the colours of
the rainbow!'

[Illustration: They overran the house without loss of time.]

_Fatima_, meanwhile, was not in the least amused by the sight of all
these riches, being consumed by a curiosity even more ardent than
that of her friends. Indeed, she could scarcely contain herself and
listen to their chatter, so impatient she felt to go and open the
closet downstairs. If only _Blue Beard_ had not forbidden this one
little thing! Or if, having reasons of his own to keep it secret, he
had been content to take the key away with him, saying nothing about
it! At least, if he wished to prove whether or not poor _Fatima_ could
rise above the common frailty of her sex--and he was, as we shall see,
a somewhat exacting husband--he should have warned her. As it was,
her curiosity grew and possessed her until at length, without even
considering how uncivil it was to leave her guests, she escaped from
them and ran down a little back staircase, in such haste that twice or
thrice she tripped over her gown and came near breaking her neck.

When she reached the door of the closet she hesitated for a moment or
so, thinking upon her husband's command, and considering what ill might
befall her if she disobeyed it. While he uttered it his look had been
extremely stern, and a blue beard--for after a month of married life
she could no longer disguise from herself that it was still blue, or
at any rate changing colour less rapidly than she or her mother had
promised themselves--might betoken a harsh temper. On the other hand,
and though she continued to find it repulsive, he had hitherto proved
himself a kind, even an indulgent husband, and for the life of her she
could not imagine there was anything unpardonable in opening so small a
chamber. The temptation, in short, was too strong for her to overcome.
She took the little key and, trembling, opened the door.

At first, shading her eyes and peering in, she could see nothing,
because the window-shutters were closed. But after some moments she
began to perceive that the light, falling through the shutters, took
a reddish tinge as it touched the floor. So red it was--or rather,
red-purple--that for a moment or two she supposed the closet to be
paved with porphyry of that colour. Still, as she stared, and her
eyes by degrees grew accustomed to the gloom, she saw--and moment by
moment the truth crept upon her and froze her--that the floor was all
covered with clotted blood. In the dull shine of it something horrible
was reflected.... With an effort she lifted her eyes to the wall
facing her, and there, in a row, on seven iron clamps, hung the bodies
of seven dead women with their feet dangling a few inches above the
horrible pool in which their blood had mingled.... Little doubt but
these were the wives whom _Blue Beard_ had married and whose throats he
had cut, one after another!

Poor _Fatima_ thought to die of fear, and the key, which she had pulled
from the lock, fell from her hand. When she had regained her senses a
little, she picked it up and locked the door again; but her hand shook
so that this was no easy feat, and she tottered upstairs to recover
herself in her own room. But she found it filled with her officious
friends, who, being occupied with envy of her riches and having no
reason to guess that, in a husband's absence, anything could afflict so
fortunate a wife, either honestly ignored her pallor or hoped (while
promising to come again) that they had not overtired her by their visit.

They promised, too, to repeat their call very soon, at the same time
inquiring how long her husband's journey might be expected to last. It
was plain that they feared him, one and all. Half an hour ago she might
have wondered at this.

They were gone at last. _Fatima_, drawing the key from her pocket, now
to her horror observed a dull smear upon it, and remembered that it had
fallen at her feet on the edge of the pool of blood in the closet. She
wiped it; she rubbed it on the sleeve of her robe; but the blood would
not come off. In a sudden terror she ran to her dressing-room, poured
out water, and began to soap the key. But in vain did she wash it, and
even scrape it with a knife and scrub it with sand and pumice-stone.
The blood still remained, for the key was a magic key, and there was no
means of making it quite clean; as fast as the blood was scoured off
one side it came again on the other.

She was still scouring and polishing, when a horn sounded not very far
away. In her flurry she paid little heed to this, or to the rumble of
wheels she heard approaching. Frightened though she was, she supposed
that she had still almost six weeks in which to restore by some means
the key to its brightness. But when the wheels rolled up to the
porchway and came to a stop, and when the horn, sounding again, blew
her husband's flourish, then indeed the poor lady's knees knocked
together and almost sank beneath her. Hiding the key in the bosom of
her bodice, she tottered forth to the head of the stairs, to behold
_Blue Beard_ himself standing beneath the lamp in the hall below.

He caught sight of her as she leaned over, clinging to the balustrade;
and called up cheerfully that he had received letters on the road with
news that his journey was after all unnecessary--the business he went
about had been settled, and to his advantage. Still shaking in every
limb, _Fatima_ crept downstairs to give him greeting. She ordered
supper to be prepared in haste; and while he ate, forced herself to ask
a hundred questions concerning his adventures. In short she did all she
could to give him proof that she was delighted at his speedy return.

Next morning, having summoned her to attend him on the terrace, he
asked her to render back the keys; which she gave him, but with such a
trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened.

'How is this? 'said he. 'Why is not the key of my closet among the
rest?'

'I must have left it upstairs on my table,' said _Fatima_.

'Fetch it to me at once,' said _Blue Beard_. 'At once, and without
fail.'

She went, and after a while returned, protesting that she could not
find it.

'Go back and seek again,' commanded _Blue Beard_, dangerously calm.

After going backwards and forwards several times, she could pretend no
longer, but brought him the key. _Blue Beard_ examined it closely, and
demanded--

'How came this blood upon the key?'

'I do not know,' answered poor _Fatima_, paler than death.

'You do not know!' cried _Blue Beard_ in a terrible voice. 'But I know
well enough. You have chosen to enter that closet. Mighty well, madam;
since that poor room of mine so appeals to your fancy, your whim shall
not be denied. You _shall_ go in, and take your place among the ladies
you saw there!'

_Fatima_ flung herself at her husband's feet, and wept and begged his
pardon with every sign of truly repenting her disobedience. She would
have melted a rock, so beautiful and sorrowful she was; but _Blue
Beard_ had a heart harder than any rock.

[Illustration: The unhappy FATIMA cried up to her:--

'Anne, Sister Anne, do you see any one coming?']

'You must die, madam,' said he, 'and that presently.'

'Since I must die,' she answered, looking up at him with eyes all
bathed in tears, 'grant me a little time to say my prayers.'

'I grant you,' replied _Blue Beard_, 'ten minutes, and not a second
more.'

As she went from him, and through the house towards her own apartment,
at the foot of the great staircase she met with her sister _Anne_, who
(unaware of _Blue Beard's_ return) had just arrived to pay her a visit.

'Ah, dear sister!' cried _Fatima_, embracing her. 'But tell me, oh, and
for Heaven's sake, quickly! where are my brothers _Selim_ and _Hassan_,
who promised to come with you?'

'They are at home,' said _Anne_. 'They were detained at parade, and
I have come ahead of them. I could wait for them no longer in my
impatience to see you; but just as I was starting they arrived back
from the parade-ground, and sent word that they will follow as soon as
they have groomed their horses, and spend a happy day with you.'

'Alas!' sobbed _Fatima_, 'they will never see me alive in this world!'

'But what has happened? 'asked her sister, amazed.

'He--_Blue Beard_--has returned.... Yes, and in a few minutes he has
promised to kill me. But ah! ask me no questions--there is so little
time left. Dear sister, if you love me, run upstairs and still up to
the top of the tower, look if my brothers are not coming, and if you
see them, give them a signal to make haste!'

Her sister _Anne_ left her and ran up, up, to the roof of the tower;
and from time to time as the minutes sped, the unhappy _Fatima_ cried
up to her:--

'_Anne, Sister Anne, do you see any one coming?_'

And _Sister Anne_ answered her:--

'_I see nothing but the noon dust a-blowing, and the green grass
a-growing._'

By and by _Blue Beard_, who had pulled out his huge sabre, and was
trying its edge on the short turf of the terrace, shouted to her:--

'Wife, your time is up. Come down, and at once!'

Then, as she made no answer, he shouted again, and as loudly as he
could bawl: 'Come down quickly, or I will come up to you!'

'A moment--give me a moment longer!' she answered, and called softly to
her sister: '_Anne, Sister Anne, do you see any one coming?_'

And _Sister Anne_ answered: '_I see nothing but the noon dust
a-blowing, and the green grass a-growing._'

'Come down quickly,' shouted _Blue Beard_, 'or I will come up to you!'

'I am coming,' answered his wife; and again she cried: '_Anne, Sister
Anne, do you see any one coming?_'

'I see,' answered _Sister Anne_, 'yonder a great cloud of dust coming.'

'Is it my brothers?'

'Alas! no, sister. I see a flock of sheep.'

'Will you not come down?' bawled _Blue Beard_.

'Just one moment longer!' entreated his wife, and once more she called
out: '_Anne, Sister Anne, do you see nobody coming?_'

'I see,' she answered, 'yonder two Knights a-riding, but they are yet a
great way off.... God be praised,' she cried a moment after, 'they are
our brothers! I am waving my handkerchief to them to hasten.'

Then _Blue Beard_ stamped his foot and roared out so terribly that he
made the whole house tremble. The poor lady came down and, casting
herself, all in tears and dishevelled, at his feet, clasped him by the
ankles while she besought him for mercy.

'This shall not help you,' said _Blue Beard_, 'You must die!' Then,
taking hold of her hair and twisting her head back, the better to
expose her beautiful throat, he exclaimed: 'This be the lesson I read
against curiosity, the peculiar vice of womankind, and which above
all others I find detestable. To that most fatal habit all the best
accredited religions, in whatever else they may differ, unite in
attributing the first cause of all misfortunes to which the race is
subject.... In this strain he continued for fully three minutes, still
grasping her hair with one hand while with the other he flourished his
sabre.

As he ceased, poor _Fatima_ looked up at him with dying eyes. 'Ah,
sir!' she besought him, (if this curiosity be, as you remind me, my
worst sin, you will not be so cruel as to destroy me before I have
confessed and asked pardon for it. Grant me, then, just one moment more
to fix my thoughts on devotion!'

[Illustration: Then BLUE BEARD roared out so terribly that he made the
whole house tremble.]

'No, no,' was his answer; 'recommend thyself to Heaven'; and he swung
up his sabre to strike.

At that very instant there sounded so loud a knocking at the gate that
he came to a sudden stop. His arm dropped as the gate flew open and
two cavaliers ran in with drawn swords and rushed upon him. Loosing
his hold upon _Fatima_, who sank fainting upon the grass, he ran to
save himself, but the two brothers were so hot on his heels that, after
pursuing him through the vineries and the orange-house, they overtook
him just as he reached the steps of the main porch. There they ran
their swords through his body, and, after making sure that he was dead,
returned to their sister, who opened her eyes, indeed, as they bent
over her, but had not strength enough to rise and embrace them.


_Blue Beard_ had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his
estates. She employed a part of her wealth to marry her sister _Anne_
to a young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another part to
purchase captains' commissions for her two step-brothers; and the rest
to marry herself to a very worthy gentleman who made her forget the
short but unhappy time she had passed with _Blue Beard_.


                      MORAL
               (For Curious Wives)
     _Wives should have one lord only. Some have reckon'd_
     _In Curiosity t' enjoy a second._
     _But Scripture says we may not serve two masters,_
     _And little keys have opened large disasters._

                     ANOTHER

      (For Chastising or Correcting Husbands)

     _The very best sermon that ever was preach'd_
     _Was a thought less effective the longer it reached._

